raw_copy/notes/What I'm Reading.md, before:

---
title: What I'm Reading
---

> Here's a quick collection of articles I liked and read recently. Books will be separately filed at some point

## Things I Liked
To see a list of all the articles which i've read recently check out my reading [[highlights]].
Articles on this page however are ones which I would recommend to friends. I might link them at some point to other bits of info which I've considered but no guarantees

## Mindset

- [[Choose Your Status Game Wisely]]
- [[Why I got a PhD at age 61]]
- [[Life is Short]]

## Programming
- [[Two vexing problems in functional programming]]
- [[A Tale of Yak Shaving- Accidentally Making a Language, for an Engine, for a Game]] : I thought this was pretty funny 
- [[Why Don't More Languages Offer Flow Typing-]]
- [[Detecting silent errors in the wild- Combining two novel approaches to quickly detect silent data corruptions at scale]] : This was an interesting article which combined a mix of hardware limitations and software testing approaches. I've only read about chaos monkey testing prior to this and seeing an alternative and more high level approach was quite an eye opener.
- [[Building data-centric apps with a reactive relational database]] : Interesting look at local-first database schemas. Personally, I don't think it'll be practical to deploy for some time but we shall see~

## Web3
- [[The True Sources of DeFi Yield]] : This was a good article that helped to summarize a lot of the [[Web3]] concepts which I struggled with for quite a while

## Beginner Guides
I enjoyed these a lot and thought they deserved their own section
- [[A beginner’s guide to DAOs]]
- [[A beginner's guide to DeFi]]
- [[A beginner's guide to social tokens]]

## History
- [[When the Mongols Set Out to Conquer the World, There Was Only One Limiting Factor- Grass]]
- [[How Women-and Their Hair-Transformed South Korea]]


## Interesting Articles
- [[Are we running out of resources-]] : Optimistic take on why the supply crisis and pending oil supply shortage will be merely a blip in humanity's history

Commit message:

Fixing up some interesting stuff:

raw_copy/notes/What I'm Reading.md, after:

---
title: What I'm Reading
---

> Here's a quick collection of articles I liked and read recently. Books will be separately filed at some point

# Books 

## Reading

[[The Millionare Fastlane]]
[[The Coding Career Handbook]]
[[Building a Second Brain]]


# Online Resources

[[Complete Freelancing Bundle - Kyle]]

# Articles I've Liked
To see a list of all the articles which i've read recently check out my reading [[highlights]].
Articles on this page however are ones which I would recommend to friends. I might link them at some point to other bits of info which I've considered but no guarantees

Here are some summaries of texts I've read that don't have online editions
- [[Ancient Roman History in a Nutshell]]
- [[Water Supply, Drainage and Water Mills]]

## Mindset

- [[Choose Your Status Game Wisely]]
- [[Why I got a PhD at age 61]]
- [[Life is Short]]
- [[On Friendship and on Finding Your People]] : I thought this was a rather sobering read at the author's own reflections after finishing college. Highly recommend.

## Programming
- [[Two vexing problems in functional programming]]
- [[A Tale of Yak Shaving- Accidentally Making a Language, for an Engine, for a Game]] : I thought this was pretty funny 
- [[Why Don't More Languages Offer Flow Typing-]]
- [[Detecting silent errors in the wild- Combining two novel approaches to quickly detect silent data corruptions at scale]] : This was an interesting article which combined a mix of hardware limitations and software testing approaches. I've only read about chaos monkey testing prior to this and seeing an alternative and more high level approach was quite an eye opener.
- [[Building data-centric apps with a reactive relational database]] : Interesting look at local-first database schemas. Personally, I don't think it'll be practical to deploy for some time but we shall see~

## Web3
- [[The True Sources of DeFi Yield]] : This was a good article that helped to summarize a lot of the [[Web3]] concepts which I struggled with for quite a while

## Beginner Guides
I enjoyed these a lot and thought they deserved their own section
- [[A beginner’s guide to DAOs]]
- [[A beginner's guide to DeFi]]
- [[A beginner's guide to social tokens]]

## History
- [[When the Mongols Set Out to Conquer the World, There Was Only One Limiting Factor- Grass]]
- [[How Women-and Their Hair-Transformed South Korea]]


## Interesting Articles
- [[Are we running out of resources-]] : Optimistic take on why the supply crisis and pending oil supply shortage will be merely a blip in humanity's history
