---
title: "Water Supply, Drainage and Water Mills"
last-updated: "2022-04-21"
---

- Roman Acqueducts were worthy of being one of the seven wonders of the world and were ranked by Dionysius of Halicarnassus would rank the aqueducts and the sewers among the most important achievements of Roman culture
- Humble Beginnnings
	- Appius Claudius Caesium started work on it and the first version was the simple Via Appia
	- At the time, Rome was engaged in a difficult war with the Samnites, and the Via Appia which led south to Campania was strategically important. The importance of the Aqua Appia is less clear.
	- Three other aqueducts were built during the republican period, normally with censors or praetors in charge: Anio (vetus) in 272–269 bc, Aqua Marcia in 144–140 bc and Aqua Tepula in 126–125 bc. 
	- That period of social and political conflicts, until Augustus took control in Rome, was not conducive to a long-range costly project such as the construction of an aqueduct, although the first century bc was a period of growing population and increasing demand for urban amenities.
	- Under the direction of Augustus’ loyal follower M. Vipsanius Agrippa major investments in the water supply were made. In 33 (or 40) bc the Aqua Julia was introduced, in 19 bc the Aqua Virgo and in 2 bc the Aqua Alsietina. Half a century later in ad 52 the two largest aqueducts (by volume), the Anio Novus and the Aqua Clau- dia, were inaugurated by the emperor Claudius, after their construction had been begun under Gaius. In 109 Trajan inaugurated the Aqua Traiana, financed with the booty from the conquest of Dacia, while Caracalla, during his sole reign (211–17), added new sources to the Marcia and built a new branch from it to his Baths. 
- A lot of attention was dedicated to ensuring that the water supply was well managed 
	- **Evidence** : Most frequent are inscrip- tions on lead pipes (fistulae), which number some 800 in Rome alone and are still often neglected by scholars, although they contain crucial information on, for instance, administration, distribution and manu- facture. 
	- **Evidence**Important beyond comparison is Sex. Iulius Frontinus’ De aquaeductu urbis Romae, ‘On Rome’s water supply’, written around the year ad 100 by the then curator aquarum, the city’s ‘Water Commis- sioner’. In fifty-three pages (in the recent Cambridge edition) Frontinus presents information on, among other topics, the history, the topography, the volume of water and its distribution, and the administration of Rome’s aqueducts.
	- **Elaboration** : THis was a topic which a lot of time and effort had been dedicated to this topic
- Agrippa handled this mostly and was given a large task force in order to handle this
	- Frontinus says that the curatores aquarum were leading senators (aq. 1) and the list of sixteen predecessors he gives confirms this (aq. 102). The curatorship was a ceremonial one in many ways; no technical expertise was required of the curator, and it seems that cura- tors were not always present in Rome; hydraulic and other relevant knowledge was to be found primarily or even exclusively on the lower levels of the organization. Among the experts that were part of the workforce Frontinus mentions architecti (engineers), silicarii (pavers), tec- tores (plasterers) and common aquarii (aq. 100.1, 117.1). In Agrippa’s times, a force of 240 slaves and freedmen had been employed for aque- duct work. In his testament, they were bequeathed to Augustus, who donated them to the Roman state with the intention that they continue to serve the water supply. The emperor Claudius increased that number by 460 men from among the imperial slaves and freedmen (aq. 116.4).
- The curator aquarum was in charge of the upkeep of the existing aque- ducts, however, and this was a central task of his. Frontinus writes that the curator had to guarantee the flow of water ‘day and night’ (aq. 103.4), and he also remarks on the constant need to repair the existing structures. 
	- Wear and tear and damages inflicted by inclement weather, for instance freezing temperatures in the winter, required vigilance. Frontinus recommended that repairs be carried out in the spring or in the fall (aq. 122.3). Interestingly enough, he warns against too readily believing those who urge that repairs are required, clearly in order to avoid fattening the purse of dishonest contractors who were keen to engage in unnecessary projects (aq. 119).
	- the Roman practice during the imperial period would have been to offer larger tasks to private contractors (redemptores), as had been done during the Republic and Agrippa likely did too
- Technical Considerations
	- The total length of Rome’s aqueducts is over 500 km. The longest was the Aqua Marcia with 91 km, which makes it one of the longest ever built by the Romans
	- Carrying the aqueduct on arches was much less common, but the general notion that the aqueducts were elevated in this way derives in part from the fact that arches were used when approaching Rome over the Campagna, in order to preserve the height, as well as in several places inside the city (the Arcus Neroniani, the branch crossing the Caelian Hill to the Palatine, is conspicuous). Roman engi- neers relied on gravity to convey water to Rome, which means that extensive surveying was needed before an aqueduct could be built. The slope of the aqueducts of Rome varies from a mere 0.2 m per km (Aqua Virgo) to an average of around 3 m per km
	- Siphons were normally built of lead, and some water mains in Rome may have been of lead too, but otherwise the Roman engineers built in masonry. Crucial was the waterproof mortar that they used to line the interior of the aqueducts (the specus) with. The specus varies in size from aqueduct to aqueduct, but it was normally large enough to enable a man to enter, in order to carry out cleaning and repair work. 
- Volume Supply
	- The figure of 1 million m3 per day is often given as the total capacity of Rome’s aqueducts, or 1,000 litres per day per person, estimating the population at 1 million. Such a per capita amount is enormous, and still today exceeds the consumption in the best-provided (or most wasteful) cities. 
	- The soundest way to approach the question of the delivery of the aqueducts seems to me to be the investigation of the ancient specus carried out by some scholars, who have from the residue left on the walls by the calcium-rich water concluded up to what level the aqueduct was filled in antiquity. Then by measuring the slope of the aqueduct and the roughness of the wall – both factors that influence the velocity of the water – they have calculated the maximum amount of water the aqueduct could deliver. 
- Unequal Hierachal Distribution
	- The other question to discuss in this context is distribution, which will affect the living conditions of the average Roman. In this respect, the Roman system differs decisively from current practice.
	- Frontinus dedicates large sections of his treatise to the water distribution in Rome, and he also gives overall figures for the desti- nation of the water: 17 per cent was distributed (sub) nomine Caesaris (to the emperor or to particular destinations which the emperor has singled out, such as imperial baths or the barracks of the Praetorian Guard); 44 per cent went to the public, usibus publicis, while over 38 per cent was destined for private individuals (privatis) (aq. 78.3). The percentages are calculated from the measures in quinaria given by Fron- tinus. Even though we now know that these measures cannot be exact, they should roughly respect the actual proportions, and, above all, they show the proportions that the cura aquarum (and the emperor) found acceptable.
	- According to Frontinus (aq. 78.3), there were over 750 installations that provided Rome’s population with water: castra, opera publica, munera, and especially the smaller lacus. He proudly reports as a novelty that each lacus was supplied by water from two aqueducts so that even if one was temporarily shut down for service or because of malfunction, the residents would not suffer too much (aq. 87.5). 
- Imperial Water Grants
	- In his treatise, Frontinus devotes much more space to private water grants than to water for usus publicus. That is understandable, because these grants were an imperial privilege reserved for the elite, to which Frontinus belonged and for whom he mainly wrote. 
	- private conduits had been extremely rare and were only given out to the most deserving citizens by general acclaim (aq. 94.1). The new aqueducts he introduced allowed Agrippa to be much more generous, and during his administration of the water supply a register of private water right holders was established.
	- He makes it clear that it was a much-sought-after privilege to receive the right to instal a private conduit.
	- Grants were given for life, to individuals or to associates. They could not be inherited or sold, Frontinus writes, although in this regard he is less than clear and mixes quotes from official regulations with contradictory comments. This conundrum cannot be resolved without considering the full range of sources, primarily the fistula inscriptions.
	- The names of the putative water right owners in Rome have been collected (they total some 300) and, where possible, identified. Among the identified owners the social elite dominates, and it seems that the families of former consuls are particularly well represented, at the expense even of ordinary senators (including family members). There are also a few powerful equestrians and some imperial freedmen.
	- Normally, names in the nominative are accompa- nied by the verb fecit and indicate the manufacturer of the conduit, while names in the genitive indicate possession of the water conduit and hence of the imperial grant, although a few seem to refer to the owner of the officina who manufactured them, or to an official under whose cura the conduit was installed.
- State of Water Supply
	- The pattern among the holders of an imperial water grant, and the details about improprieties and theft among the aquarii that Frontinus relates (aq. 112–13, 114.1) lead to a surprising conclusion: water was a scarce commodity in imperial Rome.
	- The demand for water is elastic and once it became fashionable among the wealthy elite to have a domus provided with garden, fountains and a bath there was no way the cura aquarum could satisfy every request. 
	- A small elite of pri- vate concession owners (probably no more than a few thousand at any one time) were allotted almost the same amount of water as the gen- eral public, around 1 million people. In addition, much of the water delivered at the public fountains and water posts for common con- sumption was never put to use because water flowed continuously day and night, as Frontinus says (aq. 103.2, 104.2).
	-  Although the imperial baths consumed large quantities of water, they represented a form of luxury that the commoners of Rome could enjoy for free and that the emperor was expected to provide. 
	- Major aqueduct enterprises often resulted in new imperial baths, and the main purpose of the Aqua Alsietina seems to have been to supply Augustus’ Naumachia, a venue for mock sea-battles.
- Sanitation
	- A population of 1 million people produced some 50,000 kg of solid bodily waste per day.