---
title: "Web3"
---

> These contain the notes that I made for the [Web3 Dao Course](https://www.learnweb3.io/)

# Blockchain

> A blockchain is a shared, distributed, and permanent database shared among multiple nodes on a computer network. They record data in a way that makes it probabilistically impossible to modify or hack the system.

Blockchains start off with a Genesis State when they launch. Bitcoin's genesis state happened in 2009 when the public network launched. Ethereum's Genesis State happened in 2015, when it launched.

Every transaction on a blockchain modifies the global state that is replicated across all nodes. Since there are millions of transactions, transactions get grouped together in blocks. Hence the name. These blocks are chained together in a cryptographically verifiable way so they are historically traceable.

Each block stores a hash, the hash of the previous hash and some information. The original use of proof-of-work resulted in it being difficult to create new blocks. As a result, this meant that individuals could not easily modify the state of the blockchain.

**tldr;**

Miners create new blocks by using what is known as proof-of-work. This then allows them to propose new blocks to add to the entire network which will then cause the state of the blockchain to be updated across all nodes.

## Resources

- [What Is A Blockchain ( Youtube )](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSo_EIwHSd4)

# Web3
**tldr;**

Web1 :  Read
Web2 :  Read-Write
Web3 : Read-Write-Own

## Web 1
The first phase of the Internet, Web1, was mainly about providing the everyday consumer with online content and information. As consumers could only read information or content online, and not yet interact with it, Web1 was incredibly static.

## Web2
Web2 is the version of the internet most of us know and use today. Where Web1 was static and “read-only,” Web2 is “read-write,” and interactive. Under Web2, the internet became more usable: web2 was dynamic and users could consume, interact with, and create content on the internet themselves.

## Web3
Web3, the future internet we’re moving towards, is a decentralized internet. Under Web3, the internet is shared online and governed by the collective “we,” rather than owned by centralized entities. The Web3 world is one that has open-source protocols at its foundation. Web3 is about rearchitecting internet services and products so that they benefit people rather than entities.

> Web3 enhances the web we know today by making it decentralized, distributed, open, trustless and permissionless.


# Eth
> Ethereum is a decentralized blockchain that supports smart contracts. Unlike Bitcoin, which only supports the transfer of the Bitcoin token around the network, Ethereum is more general purpose.

We can program [[Smart Contracts]] on Ethereum using [[Solidity]] which is its native programming language. The network itself is mantained across a variety of different computer nodes which come together to form the Ethereum Virtual Machine.


# Crypto Wallets

**Definitions**
-  **Address :**  An address is a string of text generated using cryptography to represent your account on the blockchain.
- **Private Keys** : A private key is like a password that contains a bunch of letters and numbers that allow you to manage the crypto held by your address.
- **Seed Phrase** : A seed phrase is a series of words generated by your cryptocurrency wallet that give you access to the crypto associated with that wallet.
- **Crypto Wallets** : Crypto wallets manage the private keys for your addresses

# Tokens

> A **_token_** on Ethereum is basically just a smart contract that follows some common rules — namely it implements a standard set of functions that all other token contracts share, such as `transferFrom(address _from, address _to, uint256 _tokenId)` and `balanceOf(address _owner)`.

We can learn more about [[ERC Token Standards]] here.